Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
Tellerik create compelling app experiences
across any screen with the
Tellerik platform Telerx end to
end platform. Uniquely combines industry
leading UI tools with cloud
services to simplify the entire
app development cycle Tellerik offers
everything.net developers need to build
quality apps faster. Try it
free at tellerik.com/platform that's tellerik.com/platform
From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hanselman it's our weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman. This is
Lawrence Ryan announcing show number 523.
And this is episode Scott
talks with linguist, Nick farmer,
best known for developing the
belt or constructed language for
the Sidebuy television drama, the
expanse Scott Hanselman. This is
another episode of Hansel minutes.
And today I'm talking with
Nick farmer. He is a
linguist and is working right
now as the linguist, creating
the belt or Creole language
on the scifi show, the
expanse or expanse. How are
you? I'm great. How are
you doing? I'm pretty stoked
to be talking to you.
I am a, I like
to say I'm an amateur
linguist, which means that I've
taken like one class and
I like the feeling of
different words in my mouth.
So I'm afraid I don't
have any academic background, but
what, what's your background from
an academic perspective? So I
definitely took a pretty untraditional
route. It's kind of like
a family business for me.
My godfather was an MIT
linguist. My mother was an
MIT linguist. My dad was
a bit more of a
philologist, but also really involved
with language. And I actually
tried to avoid it. I
studied philosophy mostly in my
undergrad, but I couldn't achieve
a skateboard, but, and I
just fell back into linguistics.
Yeah. And is this, what
does a philologist again, forgive
me. So a philologist is
a, it was what people
used to do before the
modern study of linguistics. It's
kind of focusing on classical
languages like Latin and ancient
Greek in Sanskrit, and really
focusing on poetry and literature,
as opposed to a linguist
is just more interested in
everyday language. I mean, how
language is actually used rather
than how we would prescribe
it and a grammar class.
And I understand that you,
you speak varying levels of
varying languages, quite a few.
And I think that people
are always impressed by that.
You know, like, Oh my
God, he speaks a dozen
languages. And let me ask
you this because I, the
last person that I met
who said that they knew,
I don't know, 15 languages
is some famous person whose
name I won't on the
air. And the individual is
expressing how many languages that
you do. And sometimes people
do that. You've probably met
these people at parties and
they try to use it
as a way to impress.
Right. This person told me
that my friend told me
that if you say to
someone who says, Oh, you
want to speak Spanish? You
say, all right, well, tell
me, how do you say
flush the toilet? And they
will, they either know it
or they don't they'll go.
Cause they lived there and
they lived it, you know?
And in French it's like
pull the chain. So it's
a perfect example of an
idiomatic phrase that tells you
whether someone knows it or
whether they just speak, like
I speak Spanish, but I
don't really, I speak Chipotle
in Spanish.  know what
I'm saying. Yeah. You know,
this is actually a really
good conference I have. And
part of the reason why
I think that it, I
try and avoid the question
as much as I can,
because there's so many different
ways that you can define
how you speak a language.
And they're the people who
never took a course. And
they just lived there for
a really long time and
they'll know that. And you
know, for me, I, I'm
mostly interested in, in the
grammars. And so I may,
you know, know everything that
there is to know about
how the language is constructed,
but I didn't necessarily pick
up that expression because I
can only be in so
many places at once. Yeah,
exactly. Yeah. I, I speak
chunks of a number of
different languages sometimes because I
had a girlfriend from that
country sometimes because I spent
a couple of months there,
like 10 years ago, I
had a pretty good grasp
of Ethiopian I'm Herrick. And
it lasted for the four
years that the relationship lasted
and now fast forward 10
years, I've probably got a
couple of hundred words and
I have a really good
understanding of the grammar and
how it fits into the
language tree. But, you know,
if I visited there, I
would probably only be a
couple of weeks ahead of,
of a tourist. Yeah. Well,
there's this expression that I've
heard before, which is there's
two, two ways to learn
a language. One is in
a, in the cradle and
the other is in bed,
but the, the image that
I use for how I
would categorize different languages. So
I have some that are
at my fingertips, so I
really can just jump in
and they're really fresh and
I can speak them without
too much effort. And then
maybe there are others that
are at like one joint
down or two joints down,
which like, I haven't spoken
in a long time, but
if you gave me a
month, you know, back in
India, I'd probably get my
Hindi back pretty well. I
was fluent at one point,
but it's been almost a
decade. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And then Hindi and Hindi
both suck down. Yeah. My
bite bite come in. They
was like, yeah, a similar
kind of thing. I feel
the same way. My wife
lived in France for a
number of years and a
while she uses it. Occasionally
when she bumps into French
speaking people, she definitely says
she needs about three months
to get warmed up. You
know what I mean? Yeah.
For me, it really is
kind, I re it's an
addiction. I am kind of
like frog from wind in
the willows. I pick one
up and I love, I
fall in love with it.
I spend several months learning
it and then I discover
the next shiny new language
and I kind of drop
the others and I just
going on and it's great
for getting an overall perspective,
but I've never really tried
to get a job specializing
in one language versus another,
You know? And that, that
is a challenging thing because
people sometimes do expect us
folks, people who are interested
in languages to be fluent.
And I think I look
at it the same way
I look at it as
Xbox games, right. Like I'll
say, yeah, I played mass
effects. Mass effect is a
great game. Oh yeah. But
did you, you know, did
you complete it? Well, no.
I mean, I played it
for like 30 hours and
I, I get it. It's
cool. I enjoyed it. No,
no, but you have to
like finish it. Well, if
I have a stack right
here of games, I'm never
going to finish that are,
you know, I'm sure they're
wonderful, but I can't go
for the completest achievement and,
and still play the variety
of games or learn the
variety of languages that I
wanted to learn. Absolutely. I
mean, it really depends on
what your goals are. If
you want to become an
ex Pat living in Spain
and sounding like a Spaniard,
then you should really focus
on Spanish, but that's not
really what I'm interested in.
I mean, I, I just
want to learn as much
as I can about a
lot of different languages and
there's only so much time
in the day and my
brain can only do so
much. I mean, I have,
yeah, probably a great facility
in more languages than most
people have, but at the
same time, that's just because
I spend a lot of
time on it. Cool. Okay.
So you've got this tool
belt of languages that you
can pull from, and you've
got an understanding of linguistics
and linguistic structure and then
fast forward a miracle happens.
And now you're the linguist
that works on a, made
up language on a scifi
show. How do you even
interview for that? How do
you get the hookup for
that job? Yeah, there was
no, well, I guess there
was a little bit of
an interview, but mostly it
was just a serendipitous connection.
I was living in New York
in 2011 game of Thrones
season one just started airing
at the time. I didn't
have a TV. I went
to a bar called professor
Tom's on second Avenue and
I would, I would watch
it there because it had
a really nice, big screen,
good speakers, whatever. And I
think around episode four, as
the episode ended, I turned
around and sitting right next
to me was George RR
Martin. And he had just,
I guess he was in
New York at the time to
deliver the manuscript for the
fifth book. And he hadn't
seen the finished product. He'd
only seen, you know, bits
of raw footage, whatever. And
he wanted to see it
live the same as everybody
else. And you happened to
see this eight and a
half by 11 poster in
the window of the bar
decided, Hey, I'll watch it
here. And he went in
and I've met him and
I didn't want to just
gush and say, Oh, I'm
such a big fan. I,
let me tell you about
how much I love all
your work. I wanted to
really contribute to the conversation.
So I asked him if
he to talk at Google
because I have a connection
there who runs the talks
program and he was familiar
with it. And he said,
sure. So he went and
brought along his assistant Thai
Frank, who is one half
of James essay, Corey, the
authors of the expanse. And
then when that connection was
made with Tai, he learned
about my background with languages.
My having lived all over
the world. And when the
show, when the books were
option to the show, he
asked me, Hey, Nick, you
wanna make a language for
us? So I said, sure,
That's amazing. It's one of
those things where like, you
know, a half an hour,
either way, not going into
a particular bar and your
whole life would have been
different. Oh, completely. It really
is just a taught me
to not be afraid of
talking to people and to
just try and meet as
many people as you can,
because you never know who
you're going to meet, who
can change your life. Yeah.
So the books existed already,
right? Did the language exists
partially in the books? Did
they make it up themselves
or did you work on
the language for the books?
What's the relationship with the
books, the language and the
tools. So the, in the
books, the language is mentioned
and it's sort of represented
in a kind of abstract
manner. They wanted to give
the effect of the language.
So they would use of
random words from different languages,
but the authors will readily
admit that they're not linguists
and they didn't know how
to go about making up
a language. So they wanted
to bring me on. And
they also gave me a
pretty free reign with what
I could do. So I
took certain individual words from
the books that were popular,
that they either show up
a lot in the books
or the fans had already
started adopting them. So things
like SASA and coping, I
incorporated those into my language
that I created for the
TV show. And the idea
of a Creole was present,
but not fleshed out. So
what is a, what is
a Creole from a linguistic
perspective versus a pigeon? So
there are many different theories
about what that distinction is,
but both are classified as
contact languages, which is, these
are languages that have occurred
when extreme, when an extreme
situation has put two languages
into contact where they don't
let the speakers of these
two languages don't have a
language in common. They don't
necessarily have enough time to
really learn the other language
or maybe not enough time
or not enough opportunity. And
so something just has to
come out a pigeon really
there's many cases of this.
Like a pigeon can sort
of form, even in like
tourist towns. Like there are
cases in Turkey, have a
version of like a mix
of Turkish and German where
a lot of tourists keep
showing up and they never
really learned Turkish. And the
local Turks kind of only
learn enough German. And so
they, they, they, the two
end up mixing. And what's
interesting is that no matter
what the mix is between,
if you have a Turkic
language in a dramatic language,
or if you have like
Zulu in English, or if
you have a, you know,
West African languages and French,
all of these end up
producing something really similar grammatically,
like there are certain commonalities
between all of the worlds
Creoles. I mean, Creoles are
the, the most fully developed
Contact languages. I mean, a
pigeon Is not quite as
grammatically consistent as a Creel,
a Creel as a fully
developed language. I mean, Haitian
Creole for example, is the
national language of Haiti. And
you can express everything in
Haitian that you could express
in any other language, you
know, differently. Things would be
lost in translation, but it
is Full language. So then
it is incorrect of us,
for example, as native English
speakers to think of them
as being simple languages or
simplistic, simply because it sounds
to us like a bunch
of English words, either modified
or twisted in some way,
it is a fully realized
grammatically there are grammar, you
could say something in it
and be wrong and people
will be like, that didn't
sound right. Oh, wow. Absolutely.
And it's just that we,
because of our Are History
of associating, a certain languages
with certain classes or races
that we have looked down
on that we will then
take those languages and think
of them as simple, because
it's just really another way
of denigrating those speakers. So,
you know, French speakers from
France hearing Haitian Creole, I
don't think they do this.
I mean, some people might
now, but traditionally let's say
200 years ago, they really
looked at the language of
Haiti and said, look at
these brutes in these barbarians
with these simple words, they've
lost all the conjugations and
they've lost all the grammar.
And what they didn't realize
is the grammar is just
as complicated, but it's complicated
in a different way. Right.
Right. Two, two examples. Also,
there's also borrowing words, like
when borrowed words become, like,
there's always the ongoing argument
with my parents and I
about whether it's four year
or four year, four year,
clearly a French word and
four years the English word
that's now officially a word.
Right. But thinking about my
wife who speaks in the
belly, which is effectively like
Zulu, and if they say
like, they don't have a
word for phone, so phone
becomes  and they put
the letter I E in
front of any noun. So
then give me the phone
becomes maybe for now. And
then as an English speaker,
you're like, I heard phone
in there. Somebody said something
about the phone and then
an inherit, like a vehicle
or a is , you
know, it's like a mechanized
thing or a machine, but
then these, these, these get
lost hundreds of years later.
And it actually, it was
my wife and I talking
and discussing this topic before
she realized that, Oh yeah,
that is phone. Isn't it?
You know, because in her
mind, that's the word for
phone, which is not a
borrowed word. It's the word.
Yeah. And this is really
a, one of the mechanisms
for changing a language when
you, when they come into
contact is the, the board
borrowings. So if you have
a word that you recognize
as coming from a foreign
source and you treat it
differently because of that, it's
not necessarily going to change
your language or yeah. It's
going to change your language
a bit more than if
you don't, if you have
now fit it into your
own grammatical system. So like
you said with , so
now you can do all
the grammatical things with iPhones
that you could otherwise, but
if you didn't have that
E which is like a,
it's a classifier, right. So
if you didn't have that,
then there would be all
sorts of you wouldn't be
able to pluralize it the
same way you wouldn't, you
know, I'm not as familiar
with. Right. Right. So like,
you know, he is the
noun classifier. So then multiple
phones would be like, I'm
a phone, I'm a foreigner,
you know, and by, by
borrowing it and making it
their own, and then, and
then giving it a life
as its own individual word,
then it lives as a
noun. And then suddenly I
can do all this stuff
with it. Right. And so
in, in modern Hebrew, for
example, there's a lot of
words there, there was a
project for a long time
to just make up words
for modern things. So for
Trying to remember, you're making
me think about the French,
like Lee weekend, you know,
they hate rights. Yeah. They
really want to do avoid
borrowing words because the problem
is, is they have a
very particular morphological system. It's
the same concept in Arabic
and other Semitic languages where
they have three continent roots.
And then depending on how
you manipulate those three continents,
you can really do a
lot of different things. You
can get all these verb
conjugations, you can get nouns,
you can get agentic, et
cetera, et cetera. But it
really only works. If you
have a clear, you know,
three, sometimes two or sometimes
four, but really a consonant
root system. If you borrow
a word like technology, and
it's just, technonogy, it's not
as clear how you would
manipulate that. And so all
of a sudden with modern
Hebrew, they borrowed now so
many of these foreign words
that their morphological system is
starting to break down and
the language is actually starting
to become a little crystallized
because of Interesting. Yeah. That
happens also with borrowed words,
as it relates to gender,
you have to invent a
gender for a broad words.
And sometimes it's just the
gender that felt right in
your mouth because that's how
the word flowed Well, and,
and there's a theory that
the rapid change of English
over the centuries as compared
to other Germanic languages, is
because of the enormous contact
that English underwent, as opposed
to German, Dutch, Swedish, et
cetera. So, you know, Germans
still has cases. For example,
an English, English hasn't has
cases for centuries. And that's
because the Norman French words
and, you know, Gaelic words
and North's words that were
being borrowed into English didn't
fit into all these. They,
they didn't know how to
put a case ending on
these words. So they just
didn't try. And all of
a sudden, now you've got
English with no case endings.
And did it be clear,
can you explain case endings
to the blaming? Yeah. So
a case ending is currently
in English. If you want
to express certain things like
a relationship that a, a
noun has either with other
things in the sentence or
what the meaning that you
want to give it, you'll
use a preposition. So you'll
say on the table, or
you'll say, you know, by
the man, you know, the,
the, that deed was done
by the man, the book
is on the table. I
hit the cat. We do
these things now in different
ways. So we either use
word order or prepositions in
with languages, with case endings.
It's essentially just a, there
will be something on the
end of the noun that
depending on what that ending
is, it will indicate the,
the function of that now.
Hmm. There's so many interesting
examples of stuff. That's just,
you know, if you come
from things in a very
ethnocentric, very English focused world,
and then you learn other
languages and like Ethiopian is
the example the way there's
no really way to say
no, there's just a way
to navigate the whole sentence
to do the whole thing.
And then it's like them,
that thing I just said,
that's totally not true. Or
whatever, you don't really find
out until the end, you
know? Or, and I've always
been frustrated and confused by
word ordering in Spanish. You
know, it's like, I did
not understand that, which you
had said, you know, I
was like, Oh my God.
You know, and that's why
we struggle so much when
we were trying to translate
because English speakers, when we
learning another language, always put
things in our word order.
Right. You know, exactly the
way I think this person
would speak it. And also
English speakers were because we're
not used to thinking about
something like a case ending.
We're really just going to
be paying attention maybe to
the beginning of a word
and not as much to
the end of the word.
And so we'll hear just
a whole bunch of words,
like maybe four different nouns
and maybe all of them
have different case endings, you
know? And then with that,
you would know what the
meaning of all of these
nouns would be if you
knew the case endings. But
if you're not paying attention
to them, you don't know
what the heck's going on
between these different names. So
let's talk about the belter
language and the expanse there's
people who grew up on
the moon and people who
grew up on Mars, people
grew up in the belt
and the asteroid belt, and
they're the belters right. And
they're physically different. And they
in there have been there
for a long, long time,
presumably hundreds of years. Yeah.
I mean, this timeline is
a little unclear and I
think it's left deliberately vague
because nobody wants to be
caught. Having made claims that
seem a little too unreasonable,
but let it's 200 years
in the future. The belters
have been there for a
couple generations, which is certainly
long enough to form a
Creole. I mean, there are
examples in the real world
of Creoles forming in one
generation and these people they're
living in space stations way
out in outer space. And,
you know, if you think
about the asteroid belt, you
have to remember that it's
not just the distance from,
you know, this asteroid to
the sun. If you're talking
about this culture, it's also
the distance of, you know,
the asteroid on one side
of the solar system, all
the way to the asteroid
on the other side of
the sun. So you can
really get long distances between
these people and with, you
know, the delay in communication
because of the speed of
light. I mean, you and
I are able to talk
from different States and for
all intents and purposes, we
can't tell that it's not
simultaneous, but if you're on
opposite sides of the solar
system, you're talking dozens of
minutes, possibly a delay in
your messages. And so you're
really gonna get, you know,
the isolation, in addition to
now, these people are coming
from different cultures around the
world, and also they are
exploited workers. So they are
not highly educated. They, you
know, if they're multilingual, they're
multilingual only in their local
languages and maybe like a
smattering of English, but not
a formal education in English.
And then they're just thrown
together on these space stations,
expected to mine, asteroids and
get along. And ultimately that's,
that's the impetus for creating
this Creel. I mean, they
don't, it's not something that
they do consciously. It's something
that just happens. You know,
if you're, if you're from
India and the guy next
to you is from China
and you both speak a
little bit of English, you
know, you'll be using that
little bit of English and
then you'll just maybe pointed
a tool and you'll use
your word for that tool.
And he'll use his word
for that tool. And like,
you'll, you'll come up with
eventually a word in between
or, you know, pick one
or the other. And then
you'll guys will start using
that word for that tool.
And if you do this
over and over and over
millions of interactions, eventually you
come up with yeah. Creole
And you just decide as
a, as a group collectively,
like, yeah, that's the word.
Right. I think we all
pretty much decided that's the
word we're going to for
that. Yes. And of course,
you know, with, with any
language you have synonyms and
they all have, may have
slight different implications. And so
maybe, maybe for something as
concrete as a very particular
tool, this isn't as big
an issue. But if you're
talking about more abstract concepts,
you could have, for example.
So in belter, the word
for good is just good.
I mean, it comes from
English and it's, it's just
your everyday, you know, run
of the mill word for
good. But if you really
wanted to express something beyond
that, then you could, there,
there would be another word
which would be okay, the
coop, which comes from Persian
and means close it's it's,
it's stronger. It's more like,
excellent. And so it can
be that depending on, you
know, what the social status
of a particular speaker would
be, that that influences the
implications of any given synonym.
And this is, I think,
what is so interesting and
why I think it's important
for people who are listening
and why. I think it's
interesting for people to listening
to think about this is
a made up language, but
you just didn't think up
a bunch of words that
felt good in your mouth.
You thought about the, the,
the, the historic, the history
behind it and the feeling
that it would have. One
of the things that caused
me to reach out to
you was that I was
watching the expanse and I
heard someone referred to home
and they say even believable.
And I was like, that's
a Zulu word. They were
referring to home. But, but
do you remember what in
Bobo is in Zulu? Right.
So in Bobo and Zulu
means, Yeah. And that gives
you a sense of what
a belt or must really
feel about their space that
they live in. Absolutely. And
that's, that's one of the
difficulties, is it, it takes
a long time to come
up with each individual word,
because again, like you said,
it's not just whatever sounds
good. Although what sounds good
does play a part in
the ultimate decision making, because
it is a language for
this purpose of entertainment. So
I always consider what sounds
good to an English ear,
and that's very subjective, but,
you know, it's gotta, it's
gotta have something that grabs
people, but even so the,
the most important thing is
that it has an etymology.
That makes sense, because if
somebody is really going to
be examining the language what's
going to excite them is
knowing that that everything was
thought out and make sense.
And if you're going to
talk about a language that's
spoken 200 years from now,
you're, that's, that's a short
enough period of time that
you should be able to
see the connections between the
words that they're using and
words that exist in real
life. And some of some
of the times it may
not change very, but sometimes
it could change in a
significant way. So like you
noticed with, in Bobo that
in Zulu, it means whole,
and you know, there's this
idea in linguistics of semantic
drift that the way a
word is used can change
over time. And the meaning
of that word can change.
And it's always just like
a little step, a little
step, a little step. But
if you have enough of
these, you can get something
that's really different. It's the
reason why awful and awesome,
which used to be essentially
the same concept now. I
mean, opposite concepts. And so
that's the reason why a
word that originally meant whole
can now. Yeah. Yeah. And
we could go on about
Zulu a long thought because
that's the one that the
language I know the most
about, but you know, when
there's this another way to
express home in Zulu or
in, in the belly, which
is  and at Kaia
doesn't just mean home. It
also means ancestral home, which
tends to be far away
from town. So when my
wife is saying like, Oh,
where do they live? And
she's like, Oh, she's saying
way out in the boondocks.
That's, you know, I mean,
they live far away, like
where, where we used to
live out in the Hills,
but we live here now,
but you could also say,
you know, see a ,
we're just going home or
we're going in. And then
you, you express the distance
and the vastness of like,
remember a hundreds of years
ago where we used to
live. Yeah. That's a great
one because it's an, you
know, it's something that rep
represents a lot of the
societal changes that, you know,
people who, you know, they
may have come from, you
know, a rural area and
now they've moved to a
city. And that's one of
the reasons why people love
etymologies because you can really
learn a lot about a
culture based off of how
the meaning of a word
has changed. Definitely. One of
the things I think is
interesting about this language and
the belt or language, and
people can go out and
Google for belter language and
learn about it is the
enthusiasm people are having over
it. And you're, you're starting
to tweet and different requests
from people about this language.
And I'm looking at this
article on our technical, that
just came out a little
article about you in the
comments, one of the actors,
Andrew roti, Leo, he played
Diogo in two episodes. He
worked, he said for weeks
on getting the language correct.
And one of the things
that he said here that
I thought was so wonderful,
the way he phrased it,
he says, I'm glad that
this oral wallpaper contributes to
the world building. I mean,
what a wonderful bit of
language they use, just to
describe that oral wallpaper, because
it does make you feel
more connected to the world,
in my opinion. Yeah. And
that's actually part of the
reason why the producers decided
not to have subtitles for
the language, because it w
they wanted to make it
that really there's no storytelling
distance between the audience and
the world that the distance
that you have is the
distance that you would feel
anytime that you're hearing a
language that you don't understand.
And this is a, this
is if you're living in
an urban environment where there
are immigrants, this is an
experience that you'll have all
the time. If you're living
in a rural place, maybe
not so often, but even
then everybody's had this experience
of a language that they
don't understand. And it's something
that is very real. And
if you just had subtitles
all the time, you would,
you would forget about them.
Yeah. Have you visited Chinatown?
And they were somehow augmented
reality subtitles below you, you
wouldn't nearly feel like you
stepped into someone else's neighborhood.
Well, I could, I could
totally imagine, you know, like
the Google glass, but that
it has like Google translate
going on in your translator.
Now that'll do the same
thing. It also makes me
think of two other great
movies that did not use
subtitles. Well, first the TV
show Firefly, they just rolled
in and out of Chinese
and poorly pronounced Chinese and
English. And then also the
fifth element, they would have
LIMU go on for 30
seconds. And we have no
idea what you're saying. And
that helps you feel more
like what Corbin Dallas was
feeling. Absolutely. It's a complicated
thing with Creoles in particular,
because in any given situation,
Creoles have still a relationship
with their mother language. So
for example, Haitian Creole still
has this connection to French.
And on any given day,
a lot of these speakers
are bilingual. They speak Haitian
Creole and they speak French.
And depending on the situation,
they will use different levels
of some sort of mix
of the two. So you
can have pure Haitian Creole
if you're talking with your
friends and family, and that
is the most intimate level
of the love language. If
you are in a, in
a court of law, however,
you would, even though it's
the official language, even though
Haitian-Creole is an official language
of Haiti, the more, the
more formal language is still
going to be French. And
so you'll be speaking in
French at that point, but
let's say you're talking to
a shopkeeper that you don't
know, it's not as formal
as a court of law,
but it's someone that you
don't know. So there'll be
some level of mixing of
Haitian Creole and French. And
we even, I mean, a
familiar example, I think to
a lot of English speakers
will be a Jamaican because
there is a Jamaican Creole,
which is distinct from English.
And you can hear that.
So the harder they come,
as, you know, a classic
classic movie with Jimmy cliff,
I think, and there are
parts of that that are
in just full on, you
know, Jamaican Creole. But then
there are other parts where
it's English with this Jamaican
accent with a lot of
words tossed in. And so,
because of this relationship, we
could do this in the
show too, where there are
times where the characters are
speaking English with belter mixed
in or belter with English
mixed in. And it was,
we would always come up
with multiple levels of this
mix. So that at any
given moment, we could figure
out what exact, like, how
much did we want the
audience to understand how much
did we not want them
to understand? And it's that
also made it easier to
include a lot of the
language without subtitles, because there
are large parts of it,
which are still understandable, but
just foreign enough, Right? Context,
enough context, where you can
figure it out. One of
the things I want to
encourage the listeners to check
out is that there's this
kind of this up and
coming concept of the Khan
Lang or they constructed language
and more and more appreciation.
I think since the creation
of cling on so many
years ago and enthusiasm around
that are getting more and
more people to get excited
about consciously constructed languages, whether
it be the belts or
Creole, or whether it be
Dothraki or whatever. And there's
also the language creation society.
So if you're into created
or constructed or consciously constructed
languages, there's community out there
for you to explore isn't
there. Yeah. And it's, it's
something that I'm aware of,
but I haven't participated in
too much. I mean, this
is really is my first
professional con Lang. And before,
you know, I I've done
some work on how people
have consciously manipulated language, usually
in the form of standardization.
So for example, you know,
all the official grammar rules
that you find with French,
I mean, that is not
as extreme as Dothraki, but
it is the same kind
of concept that we're going
to, we are going to
prescribe how people are supposed
to speak, right. Regardless of
what they actually want to
say. Well, according to people
who are on Khan, lang.org,
you are now a con
Langer, so, or con Lander.
I'm not sure which way
it is pronounced. I'm assuming
con Langer, I think online
Langer. Yeah. And there's a,
I guess if I, if
you don't mind me tossing
a little bit of a
linguistic explanation for why that
may be sure, but so
you have this suffix, like
the R suffix, which is
an agentic. So it basically
turned, it means that you
have a noun and then
you have someone who does
that. So if you have
sing, then you have a
singer. And so if you
have Conline, you have a
con liner and that suffix
won't necessarily change the sound
of the word before. It,
it's the reason why you
have this English just to
sing. It's not singer, but
it is finger A singer
on some accents, but you're
right. It is, it is.
I, yeah. I always have
to be careful to not
Long Island. Well, people can
check out constructed languages by
looking at the Twitter, hashtag
Khan Lang, and they can
check you out at end
farmer linguist on Twitter, and
they can see you talking
about the expanse. If they
follow the expanse hashtag they
can learn about the belter
language. And I must say
knowing a little bit about
the language, it makes me
just that much more likely
to want to watch the
show. I really appreciate you
chatting with me today. Yeah.
Thank you for having me.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week. .